---
title: "Becoming a 1% Man: A Journey in Self-Improvement"
draft: true
---

## Table of Contents

1. [Find a Greater Purpose](#find-a-greater-purpose)
2. [Be Presentable: Fashion and Grooming](https://mgkev.wordpress.com/2022/06/27/becoming-a-1-man-a-journey-in-self-improvement/#be-presentable-fashion-and-grooming)
3. [Have a Workout Routine](https://mgkev.wordpress.com/2022/06/27/becoming-a-1-man-a-journey-in-self-improvement/#have-a-workout-routine)
4. [Level Up Your Career and Skills](https://mgkev.wordpress.com/2022/06/27/becoming-a-1-man-a-journey-in-self-improvement/#level-up-your-career-and-skills)
5. [Social Skills](https://mgkev.wordpress.com/2022/06/27/becoming-a-1-man-a-journey-in-self-improvement/#social-skills)
6. [Don’t Shy Away From Responsibility](https://mgkev.wordpress.com/2022/06/27/becoming-a-1-man-a-journey-in-self-improvement/#don-t-shy-away-from-responsibility)

* * *

Self-Improvement is a slippery slope. First you decide to shed some fat so you get a gym membership. Next thing you know, you’ve filled your kitchen cabinets with whey and creatine, become obsessed with MyFitnessPal, and found yourself in the weeds of gymbro TikTok. It doesn’t even end there. You will have watched hours of Jordan Peterson’s talks and show up to parties with Discipline Equals Freedom tees.

What’s the alternative? Staying home and playing video games while yelling to kids on Discord? Following the formulaic mundane path taken by every forefather you’ve ever had?

I began my journey as an insecure tenth grader with a Crunch membership. Going to the gym was the single decision that cascaded into levelling up my outfits, seeking knowledge through books and podcasts, and even being more empathetic towards friends and family.

Most importantly, working out taught me that there’s always a better path forward. I can always discard my shortcomings and, with sufficient directed effort, become a more capable human being.

In my foray into the self-improvement world I have consumed countless hours of books, interviews, and YouTube videos, ideas from which I have put into practice regularly. Common themes and habits begin to emerge about becoming a better man.

Much of the advice online can be distilled to the following few key ideas. If you’re interested in diving deeper into any of them, I’ve linked relevant content that have stuck with me.

## Find a Greater Purpose

Suffering a tragic existence in many of the Nazi regime’s concentration camps, Viktor Frankl found the survivors to possess a firm understanding of their place in the world. He firmly holds that man is driven by “the call of a potential meaning waiting to be fulfilled by him._”_

When you’re clear on the why, the how falls into place. Life will present obstacles ranging from minor annoyances to immediate threats to one’s livelihood, and it is easy to give up on the latter type when you’re not clear on why you are in this world to begin with.

In the toughest rep of your workout or halfway through a challenging exam, you will face the choice of continuing or walking away. It is in those moments that one must be able to assuredly convince themselves of pushing through. Only a concrete sense of purpose can provide that answer in the heat of battle.

Viktor Frankl’s purpose was to help others find their meaning. For a 50-year-old man who finally decides to quit smoking, it is to be around long enough to see his grandchildren grow. For the destitute mother who decides to immigrate to the US, it is to provide her children with the opportunities she never had.

Sit down with your journal, list out your priorities and values, and find what keeps you going. A vague sense of direction is better than none at all.

### _Reading/Resources:_

_Man’s Search for Meaning_ by Viktor Frankl

## Be Presentable: Fashion and Grooming

## Have a Workout Routine

The one fundamental step each man can take in turning their life around is getting themselves a gym membership. Show up consistently even if it's a few days a week, go on YouTube and find a regiment to follow, and work out with a goal in mind. Resistance training has immense physical benefits including enhancing blood sugar regulation, increasing lean body mass, and making you stronger.

More importantly, though, working out fortifies the mind. As Seneca puts it, "The body should be treated more rigorously, that it may not be disobedient to the mind." Performing a set to failure is more of a mental challenge than it is physical as one realizes when they go past faliure with the right motivation. There will be days when you don't want to show up to the gym and complete a work out. In those moments, it is the rational part of your mind that will have to override the lazy inclinations of your body. Performing this override regularly will help you develop an ability to do what is necessary even when you don't feel like it.

The idea of progressive overload has immense implications in everyday life. Lifting heavier or more reps each week teaches one that improvement in any area of life is possible with minute increments. Charlie Munger famously said that the one rule of compounding is that it must never be interrupted, which is the same for weight-lifting. One missed week can delay your strength gains.

## Level Up Your Career and Skills

This is the most intuitive category as society already has structure and institutions in place to integrate people into the economy. Enrolling in some school is the most fundamental step someone can take to be intellectually stimulated. For many, school and college are obligations, and the latter is certainly not for everyone, but they are vital in earning the kind of professional legitimacy you can always fall back on. Not to mention they are more than ideal to network and put your ideas to test.

If the rigidity of institutional education doesn’t appeal to you then the internet is ripe for a creative career. It will be unconventional and challenging in its own respects but particularly reward for a resolute individual with meaningful content to provide.

Whatever mix of approaches you take, the key thread is the relentless pursuit of professional advancement through with a willingness to sacrifice and endeavor. The overarching point isn’t wealth accumulation or attaining superficial titles in an organization. Instead, it’s about rising in the hierarchy of competence by continuous refinement and exertion of your capabilities.

Whatever craft you dedicate yourself to, whether it’s being a food reviewer on TikTok or a mechanical engineer, ensure that you’re indispensable and influential by way of the unique blend of your abilities.

### _Reading/Resources:_

_Mastery_ by Robert Greene

## Social Skills

## Don’t Shy Away From Responsibility
